Migrate topic log compaction (#402)
aiven/devportal: docs/products/kafka/concepts/log-compaction.rst

Log compaction
==============

One way to reduce the disk space requirements in Apache Kafka is to use **log compaction**. This operation retains only the newest record for each key on a topic, regardless of whether the retention period of the message has expired or not. Depending on the application, this can significantly reduce the amount of storage required for the topic.

> To make use of log compaction, all messages sent to the topic must have an explicit key. To enable log compaction follow the steps described in :doc:`how to configure log cleaner <../howto/configure-log-cleaner>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make use of log compaction, all messages sent to the topic must have an explicit key. To enable log compaction, follow the steps described in :doc:`how to configure log cleaner <../howto/configure-log-cleaner>`.
```

How topic log compaction works
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

 Apache Kafka topics represent a continuous stream of messages that typically get discarded after log reaches a certain period of time or size. However for certain use cases we just need the most recent changes.

For example, if we have a topic that contains user's home address and every time there is an update, it gets sent to the topic using ``user_id`` as primary key and home address as the value:

::

   1001 -> "4 Privet Dr"
   1002 -> "221B Baker Street"
   ...
   1001 -> "21 Jump St"
   ...
   1001 -> "Paper St"

We have three different options on how long to retain the messages:

> * infinite log retention: all changes to user's address would be maintained in the logs. This would lead to the log growing in size without a bound.

Author: changed. Will link once published

* simple log retention: older log records would be deleted after log reaches certain age or size.
* log compaction: only latest version of the key's value are kept.

With log compaction Apache Kafka would remove any older records for which there is a newer version available in the partition log. This retention policy can be set per-topic, so a single cluster can have some topics where retention is enforced by size or time and other topics where retention is enforced by compaction.

Log compaction basics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To understand better how log compaction work we will look at a partition log of a compacted topic before and after compaction has been applied.

Before compaction
*****************

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1
  :stub-columns: 1
  :align: left

>   * - Offset

Author: Which one do you refer to?

>   * - Offset

Reviewer 2: The example above talks about addresses, this one only about key and value, if we could reuse the same addresses example it will be clearer IMHO

    - Key
    - Value
  * - 1
    - K1
    - 13
  * - 2
    - K2
    - 11
  * - 3
    - K3
    - 22
  * - 4
    - K3
    - 7
  * - 5
    - K1
    - 8
  * - 6
    - K4
    - 14

You can notice that there are two records with duplicate keys **K1**  and **K3.** After we apply log compaction, we only keep records with the latest offset (newest values) and the older ones get discarded.

After compaction
*****************

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1
  :stub-columns: 1
  :align: left

  * - Offset
    - Key
    - Value
  * - 2
    - K2
    - 11
  * - 4
    - K3
    - 7
  * - 5
    - K1
    - 8
  * - 6
    - K4
    - 14

> When a log is compacted it consists of head and tail, where head is the traditional  Apache Kafka log and new records get appended to the end of it.  Apache Kafka ensures that the records in the tail consist only of unique keys because only the tail section is scanned during compaction process while head section may contain duplicate keys.

Author: I must admit, I'm a bit lost here myself. We have another diagram in the original article, but it confuses me even more. Do you know more about this topic or should I research a bit deeper?

> .. note:: Log compaction occurs inside a partition and if two records with the same key land in different partitions, they will not be compacted together.

Reviewer 2: Should we state that "this usually doesn't happen since the record key is used to select the partition, but for custom message routing this might be an issue"

Author: Added

Segments
~~~~~~~~

> If we look "under the hood" of the partition we will find that  Apache Kafka divides the partitions into **segments** which are files (name ends with ``.log`` ) stored on a file system for each partition. A segment file is part of the partition. As the log cleaner cleans log partition segments, the segments get swapped into the log partition immediately replacing the older segments.

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit lost here, since I don't understand the sentence "As the log cleaner cleans log partition segments, the segments get swapped into the log partition immediately replacing the older segments." What is happening? what is the log cleaner doing?

> The first offset of the segment, **base offset,** corresponds to the file name of the segment. The last segment in the partition is called an **active segment** and it is the only segment to which new messages are appended to. **During the cleaning process, an active segment is excluded and you may see duplicate records.** The user-age partition below contains a segment 04.log that has not yet been compacted, hence you will see duplicate records.

Reviewer 2: the segment 04.log should be `segment 04.log`?

Reviewer 2: Should the phrase **During the cleaning process, an active segment is excluded and you may see duplicate records.** be at the end?

Example of user age partition:
*******************************

**01.log:**

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1
  :stub-columns: 1
  :align: left

  * - Offset
    - Key
    - Value
  * - 1
    - K1
    - 13
  * - 2
    - K2
    - 11
  * - 3
    - K3
    - 22

**04.log:**

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1
  :stub-columns: 1
  :align: left

  * - Offset
    - Key
    - Value
  * - 4
    - K3
    - 13
  * - 5
    - K1
    - 11
  * - 6
    - K1
    - 22

**07.log (active segment):**

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1
  :stub-columns: 1
  :align: left

  * - Offset
    - Key
    - Value
  * - 7
    - K4
    - 9

> 

Reviewer 2: Should we show the situation before and after the clean process?

Compacted topics
================

One way to reduce the disk space requirements in Apache Kafka is to use **compacted topics**. This methodology retains only the newest record for each key on a topic, regardless of whether the retention period of the message has expired or not. Depending on the application, this can significantly reduce the amount of storage required for the topic.

To make use of log compaction, all messages sent to the topic must have an explicit key. To enable log compaction, follow the steps described in :doc:`how to configure log cleaner <../howto/configure-log-cleaner>`.

How compacted topics work
-------------------------

> An Apache Kafka topic represents a continuous stream of messages that typically get discarded after the message reaches a certain period of time or size. However for certain use cases we just need the most recent value for a certain key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An Apache Kafka topic represents a continuous stream of messages that typically get discarded after the message reaches a certain period of time or size. However, for certain use cases we just need the most recent value for a certain key.
```

> For example, if we have a topic containing user's home address, on every update a message sent using ``user_id`` as primary key and home address as the value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if there is a topic containing a user's home address, on every update, a message is sent using ``user_id`` as the primary key and home address as the value:
```

::

   1001 -> "4 Privet Dr"
   1002 -> "221B Baker Street"
   1003 -> "Milkman Road"
   1002 -> "21 Jump St"
   1001 -> "Paper St"
   1001 -> "Paper Road 21"

> We have three different options on how long to retain the messages:

Reviewer: Maybe instead of "we" answer something like "where" or "what has it"?

> * **infinite message retention**: all changes to user's address would be maintained in the logs. This would lead to the log growing in size without a bound. This option involves a risk to outgrow the disk capacity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **infinite message retention**: all changes to user's address would be maintained in the logs. This can lead to the log growing in size without a bound. This option involves the risk of outgrowing the disk capacity.
```

> * **simple message retention**: older records would be deleted after they reach a certain age or size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **simple message retention**: older records are deleted after they reach a certain age or size.
```

> * **compacted topic**: only latest version of the key's value is kept. In the example above, only the current address for a specific user would be kept.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **compacted topic**: only latest version of the key's value is kept. In the example above, only the current address for a specific user are kept.
```

> With compacted topics, Apache Kafka removes from the topic any records for which there is a newer version (based on the record key) is available in the partition. This retention policy can be set per-topic, so a single cluster can have some topics where retention is enforced by size or time and other topics where retention is enforced by compaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With compacted topics, Apache Kafka removes any records from the topics for which there is a newer version (based on the record key) available in the partition. This retention policy can be set per topic, so a single cluster can have some topics where retention is enforced by size or time and other topics where retention is enforced by compaction.
```

Compacted topic example
-----------------------

> To understand better how compaction works we will look at a partition of a compacted topic before and after compaction has been applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To understand better how compaction works, we will look at a partition of a compacted topic before and after compaction has been applied.
```

Continuing the example above, the topic records before the compaction would be:

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1
  :stub-columns: 1
  :align: left

  * - Offset
    - Key
    - Value
  * - 1
    - 1001 
    - 4 Privet Dr
  * - 2
    - 1002
    - 221B Baker Street
  * - 3
    - 1003
    - Milkman Road
  * - 4
    - 1002
    - 21 Jump St
  * - 5
    - 1001
    - Paper St
  * - 6
    - 1001
    - Paper Road 21
 

> You can notice that there are some records with duplicate keys (``1001`` and ``1002``), with the records having offset ``4``, ``5`` and ``6`` being the addresses updates. When applying compaction, we only keep records with the latest offset (newest values) and the older ones get discarded. The end result is the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can notice that there are some records with duplicate keys (``1001`` and ``1002``), with the records having offset ``4``, ``5``, and ``6`` being the addresses updates. When applying compaction, we only keep records with the latest offset (newest values) and the older ones get discarded. The end result is the following:
```

clear sentence 👍

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1
  :stub-columns: 1
  :align: left

  * - Offset
    - Key
    - Value
  * - 3
    - 1003
    - Milkman Road
  * - 4
    - 1002
    - 21 Jump St
  * - 6
    - 1001
    - Paper Road 21

> Compacted topic details

Reviewer 3: I'm a bit confused about this part. What can the user do with this information, can they connect to the head if they want to, or do they need to specify which part of the topic they want to connect to? Do we do this differently at Aiven than would be the case for other Kafka instances?

Author: What can the user do with this information, can they connect to the head if they want to, or do they need to specify which part of the topic they want to connect to? 

- they can connect to any of the points in the stream, but this is not really related to the compaction topic.

Do we do this differently at Aiven than would be the case for other Kafka instances?

- It is the same

@ftisiot , could you correct if I'm wrong?

-----------------------

A compacted topic consists of an head and a tail:

> * the **head** is a traditional Apache Kafka topic where new records are appended. The head can therefore contain duplicated keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the **head** is a traditional Apache Kafka topic where new records are appended. Therefore, the head can contain duplicated keys.
```

* the **tail** contains one record per key. Apache Kafka compaction ensures that keys are unique in the tail. 

> .. Warning:: 

Reviewer 3: This seems really useful, can we put it a bit further up the post? Getting the keys right does seem fairly fundamental!

Author: I've moved the warning to the end of the article, this is what you meant?

>   The compaction occurs **per partition**: if two records having the same key land in different partitions, they will not be compacted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The compaction occurs **per partition**: if two records have the same key land in different partitions, they will not be compacted.
```

  * - Offset
    - Key
    - Value
  * - 1
    - 1001 
    - 4 Privet Dr
  * - 2
    - 1002
    - 221B Baker Street
  * - 3
    - 1003
    - Milkman Road

And the **head**, the newer records including duplicated keys:

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1
  :stub-columns: 1
  :align: left

  * - Offset
    - Key
    - Value
  * - 4
    - 1002
    - 21 Jump St
  * - 5
    - 1001
    - Paper St
  * - 6
    - 1001
    - Paper Road 21

During the compaction process, Apache Kafka creates a structure called **offset map** for the records in the head section, containing for each key, the latest offset.

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1
  :stub-columns: 1
  :align: left

  * - Key
    - Offset
  * - 1002
    - 4
  * - 1001
    - 6

The compaction thread then scans the **tail**, removing every record having a key that is also present in the **offset map** with an higher offset.

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1
  :stub-columns: 1
  :align: left

  * - Offset
    - Key
    - Value
  * - 1
    - 1001 :badge:`delete,cls=badge-danger badge-pill`
    - 4 Privet Dr
  * - 2
    - 1002 :badge:`delete,cls=badge-danger badge-pill`
    - 221B Baker Street
  * - 3
    - 1003
    - Milkman Road

> Lastly the records in the offset map are added in the tail. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lastly, the records in the offset map are added in the tail. 
```
